Assignment for the course
Automated Planning Theory and Practice
Academic Year 2025-2026
Marco Roveri
marco.roveri@unitn.it
1 Introduction
The aim of this assignment is twofold. First to model
planning problems in PDDL/HDDL to then invoke a state
of the art planner as those provided by planutils [5]
or manually compiled (e.g., fast downward [2], or
optic [1]). Second, to see how a temporal planning model
could be integrated within a robotic setting leveraging
the PlanSys2 [4] infrastructure discussed in the lectures
and available at https://github.com/PlanSys2/
ros2_planning_system.
This assignment can be performed alone or in group of at
most two students.
Figure 1: Automated Planning and Scheduling - Assign-
ment 2025-2026
This year, I propose two scenarios. The first is inspired
by the space domain. The second is free choice, namely the
student is asked to propose a scenario that is not related to
the space domain. The student is free to choose the sce-
nario, and she/he must provide a brief description of the
scenario, the initial state, the goal, and the actions that can
be performed. The student must also provide a brief justifi-
cation of the choice of the scenario.
2 Autonomous Preservation Robots
in an Interplanetary Museum Vault
scenario
On Mars’ largest research outpost, a subterranean structure
— The Interplanetary Museum Vault (IMV) — stores frag-
ile artifacts from various space missions, asteroid excava-
tions, and ancient Martian geology samples.
Due to a sudden micro-quakes streak, pressure fluctu-
ations threaten several high-value items. The autonomous
robotic curators must execute a series of stabilization and
relocation tasks while avoiding unstable corridors and us-
ing limited cryogenic and anti-vibration resources.
The vault is divided into zones:
• Cryo-Chamber: Maintains sub-zero temperatures
for temperature-sensitive artifacts.
• Anti-Vibration Pods : Specialized zones that
dampen vibrations, crucial for transporting delicate
items (only 2 pods available).
• Artifact Halls: Two main halls (α and β) where arti-
facts are displayed. Hall β is unstable during certain
periods due to seismic activity, while Hall α remains
stable.
• Maintenance Tunnel: A low-pressure area requiring
the robotic curators to activate their sealing mode for
safe passage.
• Stasis-Lab: The final safe destination for all artifacts,
equipped with advanced preservation technology.
The robotic curators have the folloowing goals:
• Retrieve Artifacts from Artifact Hall β (only accessi-
ble outside seismic windows).
• Place retrieved artifacts into an Anti-Vibration Pod
before transporting them.
• Transfer artifacts Artifact Hall α to the Cryo-
Chamber, ensuring their temperature never rises
above a threshold (requires cooling them).
• Relocate the Martian Core Samples from the Cryo-
Chamber to the Stasis-Lab.
The robotic curators must navigate the vault, managing
their resources and ensuring the safety of all artifacts while
adapting to the dynamic environment caused by seismic ac-
tivity.
2.1 The Problems
The assignment is structured in 5 sub problems to be solved
in sequence where the second builds on the first, both the
third and the fourth build on the second, the fifth builds on
the fourth.
2.1.1 Problem 1
Initial condition
1
• Initially all the artifacts are positioned in the rooms
as discussed above.
• There is a single robotic curator to move artifacts, ini-
tially located at the entrance of the vault.
• The robotic curator can move between the different
locations (rooms) of the vault, and can carry one arti-
fact at a time.
There are no particular restrictions on the number of ar-
tifacts available, and constraints. The problem considers
several design modeling choices left unspecified and that
each student shall consider and specify in her/his solution.
Goal The goal should be that the artifacts are moved to
their respective destinations, following the constraints dis-
cussed above.
2.1.2 Problem 2
We leverage the scenario in Section 2.1.1 with the following
extensions, where we will have to consider an alternative
way of moving artifacts (e.g., robotic curators with different
capabilities or drones), and the fact that the robotic agents
are allowed to have maximum capacity.
It might be the case additional actions, or modifications
of the previously defined actions are needed to model load-
ing/unloading/moving of the artifacts on the robotic curator
(one can either keep previous actions and add new ones to
e.g., consider the capacity of the robotic curator, and the
kind of robotic curator).
The initial condition and the goal are the same as the
problem discussed in Section 2.1.1.
2.1.3 Problem 3
We leverage the scenario in Section 2.1.2, but in this case
we need to address the problem with hierarchical task net-
works (HTN). To this extent, it is suggested to keep the
same actions as per the solution proposed for Problem 2.1.2,
the same initial condition and the same goal (encoded as an
HTN). However, here the candidate shall introduce:tasks
and :methods following approaches similar to those dis-
cussed in the Lab session on HTN.
2.1.4 Problem 4
We leverage the scenario in Section 2.1.2 with the following
extensions.
• Convert the domain defined in Section 2.1.2 to use
durative actions. Choose arbitrary (but reasonable
durations) for the different actions.
• Consider the possibility to have actions to be exe-
cuted in parallel when this would be possible in re-
ality. For example, a robotic curator cannot pick up
several artifacts at the same time, or pick up an arti-
fact and if it is a drone fly to a destination at the same
time.
The initial condition and the goal are the same as the
problem discussed in Section 2.1.2.
2.1.5 Problem 5
The final problem consists in implementing within the
PlanSys2 the last problem resulting as outcome of Sec-
tion 2.1.4 using fake actions as discussed in the tutorials of
PlanSys2 available at [3]. To facilitate the executions, if
needed the candidate can enforce that no actions execute in
parallel.
3 Free choice scenario
For the free choice scenario, the student is asked to propose
a scenario different from the one proposed in the space do-
main. The student is free to choose the scenario, and she/he
must provide a brief description of the scenario, the initial
state, the goal, and the actions that can be performed. The
student must also provide a brief justification of the choice
of the scenario. The scenario must be complex enough to
require the use of HTN, and must follow the same structure
of the space scenario (i.e. it must be composed of steps that
build on each other), and in the last step it must be shown a
simple deployment in PlanSys2.
4 Deliverables
The deliverable shall consist of a unique archive containing
at least the following contents:
• The PDDL/HDDL files (domain and problems) for
each of the problems discussed in Sections 2.1.1,
2.1.2, 2.1.3, and 2.1.4 and similar contents for the
free choice scenario, possibly organized in folders.
All the PDDL/HDDL files shall be valid ones, and
shall be parsable correctly by at least one planner (it
shall be specified which one, and discussed why the
planner has been chosen). The options used to run
the chosen planner shall be specified.
• A folder containing all the code to execute the
PlanSys2 problem as discussed in Section 2.1.5 or
of the equivalent for the free choice scenario.
• A professional report in PDF describing: (i) a brief
description summarizing the understanding of the
problems for the health care scenario, or for the free
choice scenario a description of the scenario, the ini-
tial state, the goal, and the actions that can be per-
formed, and a brief justification of the choice of
the scenario with assumptions if any; (ii) the ap-
proach followed, justifying and documenting all the
design choices (e.g., predicates, actions, ...); (iii) pos-
sible additional assumptions (for the part left under-
specifed), and in case of deviation from the specifi-
cation in this document a clear justification. Finally,
the document shall include evidence of the attempts
to solve the PDDL problems formulated, and run-
ning the final version within PlanSys2 (in form of
screenshots and/or output generated by the planner).
– The report shall also discuss the content of the
archive and how it has been organized.
– The report shall also contain a critical discus-
sion of the results obtained.
2
– It would be appreciated experimenting with
different solvers and/or options (e.g., different
heuristics), discuss possible differences in the
generated solutions, and also some scalabil-
ity analysis (e.g., considering different initial
states, size of the problem, number of agents,
number of locations).
The submission shall be performed only through the
web form available at the following URL:
Submission Form
https://forms.gle/u94MEuBb1wiBqdke7
References
[1] J. Benton, Amanda Jane Coles, and Andrew Coles.
Temporal planning with preferences and time-
dependent continuous costs. In Lee McCluskey,
Brian Charles Williams, Jos ´e Reinaldo Silva, and Blai
Bonet, editors, Proceedings of the Twenty-Second
International Conference on Automated Planning
and Scheduling, ICAPS 2012, Atibaia, S ˜ao Paulo,
Brazil, June 25-19, 2012 . AAAI, 2012. URL
http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/
ICAPS/ICAPS12/paper/view/4699. (page 1)
[2] Malte Helmert. The fast downward planning system. J.
Artif. Intell. Res., 26:191–246, 2006. (page 1)
[3] Francisco Mart ´ın and colleagues. PlanSys2 Tu-
torials, 2022. https://plansys2.github.io/
tutorials/index.html. (page 2)
[4] Francisco Mart ´ın, Jonatan Gin ´es, Francisco J.
Rodr´ıguez, and Vicente Matell ´an. PlanSys2: A
Planning System Framework for ROS2. In IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems, IROS 2021, Prague, Czech Republic,
September 27 - October 1, 2021 . IEEE, 2021. (page 1)
[5] Cristian Muise and other contributors. PLANU -
TILS , 2021. General library for setting up
linux-based environments for developing, running,
and evaluating planners. https://github.com/
AI-Planning/planutils. (page 1)
3
